---
title: The New Business of AI (and How It’s Different From Traditional Software) - a16z
image: /assets/img/research/SW_AI/SW_AI_Cover.jpg
description: > 
  Summary from reading the Andreessen Horowitz blog
---

0. this unordered seed list will be replaced by toc as unordered list
{:toc}
The writeup below are some highlights I wrote for myself. If you find the writeup useful and want to know more, then you should absolutely read the article linked.
{:.note}

## Preface

This is my personal summary from reading <a href="https://a16z.com/2020/02/16/the-new-business-of-ai-and-how-its-different-from-traditional-software/" target="_blank">The New Business of AI (and How It’s Different From Traditional Software)</a>, which was published on the Andreessen Horowitz blog <a href="https://a16z.com/" target="_blank">a16z.com</a>, a Silicon Valley venture capital (VC) investor.
This VC supported the likes of Skype and Facebook when they were still little known and dozens of others whos digital services we are using in our daily lives.
The article is excellently written, and part of the <a href="https://a16z.com/2020/12/17/ai-in-2020/" target="_blank">AI in 2020</a> series.
This series is a distillation of dozens of interviews the authors lead with ML tams and thus marks a great resource for machine learning professionals who want deep insights into new AI developments, be it startups or mature companies.
And last but not least it helps evaluating the next job opportunities.
Most of all, the series is intended by Andreessen Horowitz to support AI companies, a sector in which they are investing heavily.

## Introduction

Investors are betting today that AI companies will make a similar return as software companies.

However, in many cases that AI companies have a **different** economic construction than software businesses:

- Lower gross margins -> heavy cloud infrastructure + human support

- Scaling problems due to edge cases.

- Weaker defensive moats -> commoditization of AI models and challenges with data network effects.


Consistent pattern in the financial data of AI companies: gross margins 50-60% range, 60-80%+ for SaaS businesses.
Early investors pushing AI companies for rapid growth over returns may obscure lower growth rates.
AI is going to be a new type of business - after SaaS - and it is clearly different from Software.
The differences have to be acknowledged and addressed.

## Software + Services = AI?

### Software Company

Software (including SaaS) can be produced once and sold many times. Benefits are: A) recurring revenue streams, B) high (60-80%+) gross margins, and C) super linear scaling with (rare) network effects, D) ownership of intellectual property (source code) builds defensive moats.

### Service Company

Each new project requires dedicated headcount and can be sold exactly once: B) revenue is non-recurring, B) gross margins are lower (30-50%), C) and scaling is linear at best, D) Defensibility is challenging – often based on brand or incumbent account control – because any IP not owned by the customer is unlikely to have broad applicability.

### AI Company

Appear to combine elements of both software and services.
Most AI applications look + feel like normal software: interfacing with users, managing data, or integrating with other systems. 
However, at the center is a set of trained data models.
Maintaining these models is more like a services business. That is: requiring significant, customer-specific work and input costs beyond typical support and success functions.


## Gross Margins, Part 1: Cloud costs can be massive for AI

- AI is very demanding on cloud infrastructure: training, inference, and retraining due to data-drift, large file size input data and model transfer across cloud regions are more demanding than traditional software operations.

- Combined, 25% (or more) of revenue are spent on cloud resources. Manual processing can be cheaper in a company's early start-up phase.

- Model complexity is growing at fast rate. 10x data is needed for 2x model precision. CPU/GPUs cannot be accelerated and made cheaper fast enough. Distributed computing solves speed issues, but not costs.


## Gross Margins, Part 2: Many AI applications rely on "humans in the loop"

- Training most of today's state-of-the-art AI models involves the manual cleaning and labeling of large datasets. This process is laborious, and expensive.

- For many tasks, especially those requiring greater cognitive reasoning, humans are often plugged into AI systems in real time.

- The need for human intervention will likely decline as the performance of AI models improves. It's unlikely that humans will be removed entirely.

- How much will margins increase with AI fully automated? Reducing human intervention (and their costs) will likely increase cloud costs.



## Scaling AI systems can be rockier - AI lives in the long tail

- New customers increases the work for the ML team when the models have to be adjusted for these new customers -> drawing resources away from new sales. The problem is edge cases. Many AI apps have open-ended interfaces and operate on noisy, unstructured data (e.g., images, NLP).

- Handling edge cases means endless possible input values. Each new customer deployment is likely to infer on completely new data.

- AI companies spend time re-training the model for each new customer to eliminate edge cases prior to deployment until accuracy reaches acceptable levels.

- Startups spend more time + resources for deployment than expected. Identifying challenges in advance can be difficult since traditional prototyping tools (mockups, prototypes, beta tests) do not cover edge cases.



## The how to defend AI businesses has to be figured out

- Some of the best defensive moats are *network effects*, high *switching costs*, and *economies of scale*. Additionally, branding comes from *first to market* and *near-exclusivity*.

- For AI players, differentiation is harder: New model architectures are developed mostly in open, academic settings. Reference implementations (pre-trained models) are available from open-source libraries, and hyperparameters can be optimized automatically.

- While data is at the heart of AI, it is often owned by customers, in the public domain, or over time becomes a commodity.

- Moats for AI companies appear to be shallower than for software and shallower than expected.



## Building, scaling, and defending great AI companies – practical advice for founders

- **Reduce model complexity:** If possible, share a single model (or set of models) among all customers. It is easier to maintain, faster to roll out, and supports a simpler, more efficient engineering organization. Result: minimize cloud costs.

- **Choose problem domains carefully and narrowly:** The minimum viable task for AI models is narrower than expected. Choose problems that are hard for humans but easy for AI. That is high scale, low complexity tasks.

- **Plan for high variable costs:** build a business model and Go-To-Market strategy with lower gross margins in mind. Understand the distribution of the model data. Model maintenance and human failover are first-order problems. Measure real variable cost (no hiding in R&D). Make conservative assumptions in financial models (esp. fundraise). Scale and (outside) tech advances may not solve the problem.

- **Embrace services:** Building hybrid businesses (software/AI plus service) is harder than pure software, but this approach can provide deep insight into customer needs and yield fast-growing, market-defining companies.

- **Plan for change in the tech stack:** AI is still new. Standardized tools are just now being built: tools to automate model training, make inference more efficient, standardize developer workflows. Tightly coupling an application to the current state may lead to an architectural disadvantage in the future.

- **Build defensible:** It is unclear whether an AI model or the underlying data is a long-term moat. Good products and proprietary data almost always build good businesses. AI may vitalize old markets. Effective cloud strategies are key.



## Summary

Most AI systems are not like software and such the business works differently.
AI businesses scale not as easily, and it is harder to build defensibility.
Taken together, that makes AI feel more like a service business.
These are unfamiliar patterns, which indicate that AI companies are truly something new, including massive opportunities.